# dbt_metrics
<!--This table of contents is automatically generated. Any manual changes between the ts and te tags will be overridden!-->
<!--ts-->
* [dbt_metrics](#dbt_metrics)
* [About](#about)
   * [Installation Instructions](#installation-instructions)
   * [A note on refs](#️-a-note-on-refs)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Use cases](#use-cases)
   * [Inside of dbt Models](#inside-of-dbt-models)
   * [Via the interactive dbt server (coming soon)](#via-the-interactive-dbt-server-coming-soon)
* [Secondary calculations](#secondary-calculations)
   * [Period over Period (<a href="/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_period_over_period.sql">source</a>)](#period-over-period-source)
   * [Period to Date (<a href="/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_period_to_date.sql">source</a>)](#period-to-date-source)
   * [Rolling (<a href="/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_rolling.sql">source</a>)](#rolling-source)
* [Customisation](#customisation)
   * [Where Clauses](#where-clauses)
   * [Calendar](#calendar)
   * [Time Grains](#time-grains)
   * [Custom aggregations](#custom-aggregations)
   * [Secondary calculation column aliases](#secondary-calculation-column-aliases)
* [Experimental behaviour](#-experimental-behaviour)
   * [Dimensions on calendar tables](#dimensions-on-calendar-tables)

<!-- Created by https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc -->
<!-- Added by: runner, at: Tue Jun  7 13:41:32 UTC 2022 -->

<!--te-->

# About
This dbt package generates queries based on [metrics](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/metrics), introduced to dbt Core in v1.0. 

## Installation Instructions
Check [dbt Hub](https://hub.getdbt.com/dbt-labs/metrics/latest/) for the latest installation instructions, or [read the docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/package-management) for more information on installing packages.

## ⚠️ A note on `ref`s
To enable the dynamic referencing of models necessary for macro queries through the dbt Server, queries generated by this package do not participate in the DAG and `ref`'d nodes will not necessarily be built before they are accessed. Refer to the docs on [forcing dependencies](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/ref#forcing-dependencies) for more details.

# Usage
Access metrics [like any other macro](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/jinja-macros#using-a-macro-from-a-package): 
```sql
select * 
from {{ metrics.metric(
    metric_name='new_customers',
    grain='week',
    dimensions=['plan', 'country'],
    secondary_calculations=[
        metrics.period_over_period(comparison_strategy="ratio", interval=1, alias="pop_1wk"),
        metrics.period_over_period(comparison_strategy="difference", interval=1),

        metrics.period_to_date(aggregate="average", period="month", alias="this_month_average"),
        metrics.period_to_date(aggregate="sum", period="year"),

        metrics.rolling(aggregate="average", interval=4, alias="avg_past_4wks"),
        metrics.rolling(aggregate="min", interval=4)
    ],
    start_date='2022-01-01',
    end_date='2022-12-31',
    where=["some_column='filter_value'"]
) }}
```

`start_date` and `end_date` are optional. When not provided, the spine will span all dates from oldest to newest in the metric's dataset. This default is likely to be correct in most cases, but you can use the arguments to either narrow the resulting table or expand it (e.g. if there was no new customers until 3 January but you want to include the first two days as well). Both values are inclusive.

# Use cases

## Inside of dbt Models
You may want to materialize the results as a fixed table for querying. This is not the way we expect the dbt Metrics layer to add the most value, but is a way to experiment with the project without needing access to the interactive server.  

## Via the interactive dbt server (coming soon)
When the [dbt server](https://blog.getdbt.com/licensing-dbt/) is released later in 2022, you will be able to access these macros interactively, without needing to build each variant as a single dbt model. For more information, check out the [keynote presentation from Coalesce 2021](https://www.getdbt.com/coalesce-2021/keynote-the-metrics-system/).

# Secondary calculations
Secondary calculations are window functions which act on the primary metric. You can use them to compare a metric's value to an earlier period and calculate year-to-date sums or rolling averages.

Create secondary calculations using the convenience [constructor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructor_(object-oriented_programming)) macros. Alternatively, you can manually create a list of dictionary entries (not recommended).

<details> <summary> Example of manual dictionary creation (not recommended) </summary>

  Creating a calculation this way has no input validation. 
  ```python
  [
      {"calculation": "period_over_period", "interval": 1, "comparison_strategy": "difference", "alias": "pop_1mth"},
      {"calculation": "rolling", "interval": 3, "aggregate": "sum"}
  ]
  ```
  
</details>

Column aliases are [automatically generated](#secondary-calculation-column-aliases), but you can override them by setting `alias`. 

## Period over Period ([source](/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_period_over_period.sql))

Constructor: `metrics.period_over_period(comparison_strategy, interval [, alias])`

- `comparison_strategy`: How to calculate the delta between the two periods. One of [`"ratio"`, `"difference"`]. Required
- `interval`: The number of periods to look back. Required
- `alias`: The column alias for the resulting calculation. Optional

## Period to Date ([source](/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_period_to_date.sql))

Constructor: `metrics.period_to_date(aggregate, period [, alias])`

- `aggregate`: The aggregation to use in the window function. Options vary based on the primary aggregation and are enforced in [validate_aggregate_coherence()](/macros/secondary_calculations/validate_aggregate_coherence.sql). Required
- `period`: The time grain to aggregate to. One of [`"day"`, `"week"`, `"month"`, `"quarter"`, `"year"`]. Must be at equal or lesser granularity than the metric's grain (see [Time Grains](#time-grains) below). Required
- `alias`: The column alias for the resulting calculation. Optional

## Rolling ([source](/macros/secondary_calculations/secondary_calculation_rolling.sql))

Constructor: `metrics.rolling(aggregate, interval [, alias])`

- `aggregate`: The aggregation to use in the window function. Options vary based on the primary aggregation and are enforced in [validate_aggregate_coherence()](/macros/secondary_calculations/validate_aggregate_coherence.sql). Required
- `interval`: The number of periods to look back. Required
- `alias`: The column alias for the resulting calculation. Optional


# Customisation
Most behaviour in the package can be overridden or customised.

## Where Clauses
Sometimes you'll want to see the metric in the context of a particular filter but this filter isn't neccesarily part of the metric definition. In this case, you can use the `where` parameter of the metrics package. It takes a list of `sql` statements and adds them in as filters to the first CTE in the produced SQL. This reduces the load on the query planner to run full table scans and will hopefully improve performance.

Additionally, this parameter can be used by BI Tools to as a way for filters in their UI to be passed through into the metric logic.

## Calendar 
The package comes with a [basic calendar table](/models/dbt_metrics_default_calendar.sql), running between 2010-01-01 and 2029-12-31 inclusive. You can replace it with any custom calendar table which meets the following requirements:
- Contains a `date_day` column. 
- Contains the following columns: `date_week`, `date_month`, `date_quarter`, `date_year`, or equivalents. 
- Additional date columns need to be prefixed with `date_`, e.g. `date_4_5_4_month` for a 4-5-4 retail calendar date set. Dimensions can have any name (see [dimensions on calendar tables](#dimensions-on-calendar-tables)).

To do this, set the value of the `dbt_metrics_calendar_model` variable in your `dbt_project.yml` file: 
```yaml
#dbt_project.yml
config-version: 2
[...]
vars:
    dbt_metrics_calendar_model: ref('my_custom_table')
```

## Time Grains 
The package protects against nonsensical secondary calculations, such as a month-to-date aggregate of data which has been rolled up to the quarter. If you customise your calendar (for example by adding a [4-5-4 retail calendar](https://calogica.com/sql/dbt/2018/11/15/retail-calendar-in-sql.html) month), you will need to override the [`get_grain_order()`](/macros/secondary_calculations/validate_grain_order.sql) macro. In that case, you might remove `month` and replace it with `month_4_5_4`. All date columns must be prefixed with `date_` in the table. Do not include the prefix when defining your metric, it will be added automatically.

## Custom aggregations 
To create a custom primary aggregation (as exposed through the `type` config of a metric), create a macro of the form `metric_my_aggregate(expression)`, then override the [`aggregate_primary_metric()`](/macros/aggregate_primary_metric.sql) macro to add it to the dispatch list. The package also protects against nonsensical secondary calculations such as an average of an average; you will need to override the [`get_metric_allowlist()`](/macros/secondary_calculations/validate_aggregate_coherence.sql)  macro to both add your new aggregate to to the existing aggregations' allowlists, and to make an allowlist for your new aggregation:
```
    {% do return ({
        "average": ['max', 'min'],
        "count": ['max', 'min', 'average', 'my_new_aggregate'],
        [...]
        "my_new_aggregate": ['max', 'min', 'sum', 'average', 'my_new_aggregate']
    }) %}
```

To create a custom secondary aggregation (as exposed through the `secondary_calculations` parameter in the `metric` macro), create a macro of the form `secondary_calculation_my_calculation(metric_name, dimensions, calc_config)`, then override the [`perform_secondary_calculations()`](/macros/secondary_calculations/perform_secondary_calculation.sql) macro. 

## Secondary calculation column aliases
Aliases can be set for a secondary calculation. If no alias is provided, one will be automatically generated. To modify the existing alias logic, or add support for a custom secondary calculation, override [`generate_secondary_calculation_alias()`](/macros/secondary_calculations/generate_secondary_calculation_alias.sql).

# 🧪 Experimental behaviour 
⚠️ This behaviour is subject to change in future versions of dbt Core and this package.

## Dimensions on calendar tables
You may want to aggregate metrics by a dimension in your custom calendar table, for example `is_weekend`. _In addition to_ the primary `dimensions` list, add the following `meta` properties to your metric:
```yaml
version: 2 
metrics:
  - name: new_customers
    [...]
    dimensions: 
      - plan
      - country

    meta: 
      dimensions:  
        - type: model
          columns:
            - plan
            - country
        - type: calendar
          columns: 
            - is_weekend
```

You can then access the additional dimensions as normal:
```sql
select * 
from {{ metrics.metric(
    metric_name='new_customers',
    grain='week',
    dimensions=['plan', 'country', 'is_weekend'],
    secondary_calcs=[]
) }}
```
